# Reclaiming Liberalism? A First Pass – Nischhal Rai 

“Now, Liberalism is essentially the theory of state capitalism, of state intervention in a capitalist economy….But this new view…is a highly authoritarian position…it’s one which accepts a number of centres of authority and control: the state on the one hand; agglomerations of private power on the other hand. All interacting with individuals as malleable cogs in this highly constrained machine which may be called democratic; but given the actual distribution of powers, is very far from being meaningfully democratic… 

To achieve the Classical Liberal ideals for the reasons that led to them being put forth in a society so different, we must be led in a very different direction…. 

The reasoning, I think, is very substantial. I’m a Classical Liberal in this sense. But I think it leads me to be kind of an Anarchist, an Anarchist Socialist.” i - Noam Chomsky 

“The melancholy science, from which I make this offering to my friend, relates to a realm which has counted, since time immemorial, as the authentic one of philosophy…the teaching of the good life. What philosophy once called life, has turned into the sphere of the private and then merely of consumption, which is dragged along as an addendum of the material production-process, without autonomy and without its own substance…” ii – Theodor Adorno 

## Part 1  

Is it possible for someone to be both a liberal and a socialist in any meaningful sense of both terms? The instinctive answer to the question from those on the left of generation Z and perhaps many generations before must be “no.” Either that or a brief ten-second piercing stare aimed at the person who raises the question. It’s not hard to discern why either, given what “liberalism” has identifiably mutated into (let us be reminded that not all mutations are beneficial for the mutated entity in question) in the 21st century. That is, a superficial commitment to social minorities in terms of increasing their representation across politics and media while doing despairingly little to address the ongoing material inequalities that such groups face; an acceptance of the dominant economic arrangement: low taxes, little to no redistribution, weakened public services, the privatisation of many previously nationalised sectors, a deregulated financial system, the ongoing existence of international institutions like the IMF who help uphold the neocolonial order; a lack of courage and imagination in dealing with the already underway climate crisis; the embrace of economic elites asserting their interests over the rest of the population, and yet all under the rhetorical banner of “liberté, égalité, fraternité!”. One could imagine oneself putting on a frame of “they live”-style ideology-busting glasses and seeing that what the banner really reads is “qu'ils mangent de la brioche” – let them eat cake. 

The cynicism towards the idea that a socialist is and should be a liberal is thus to be expected, if not warranted. Nonetheless, I’ll be arguing why socialism can be understood as emanating from the liberal tradition. In particular, I’ll argue that socialism represents an advance on a core liberal concept – freedom – such that socialism from this vantage point can be understood as a certain political arrangement that is a successor to liberal philosophy. With that being said, socialism is a big topic. Liberalism is also a big topic. Thus, this essay is an initial attempt at breaking through to the other side so that you may begin to consider that a reconciliation between the two may not be so unimaginable. 

But first before the cake, the boring academic schtick of clarifying terms (dessert only comes after you finish your vegetables). 

## Part 2  

**But Liberalism sucks and Liberals are the enemy! What kind of naïve pop-psychology-influenced psy-op are you trying to pull here this time, you centrists!? **

From the outset, I want to clarify and distinguish between two senses of liberalism here. There’s a more empirical sense that refers to political, economic, and social arrangements that have been enacted by nation-states and that principally took root in the 19th century. Furthermore, this sense encompasses our current neoliberal moment, and the breakaway from post-WWII social democracy, which can be understood as a continuation or particular evolution of liberalism (“don’t call it a comeback, I been here for years!”). Contrast this with another philosophical form that refers to a tradition of political philosophy that can be dated back to Hobbes’ Leviathan and a set of ideas concerning legitimacy, alongside a sceptical attitude towards authority, democracy, equality, tolerance, and freedom. To put my cards on the table, it’s the second sense in which I want to reclaim liberalism. I have no interest in defending the first. 

### The First Sense 

“The central values of civilization are in danger. Over large stretches of the earth’s surface, the essential conditions of human dignity and freedom have already disappeared. In others they are under constant menace from the development of current tendencies of policy. The position of the individual and the voluntary group are progressively undermined by extensions of arbitrary power. Even that most precious possession of Western Man, freedom of thought and expression, is threatened by the spread of creeds which, claiming the privilege of tolerance when in the position of a minority, seek only to establish a position of power in which they can suppress and obliterate all views but their own… 

…further that they have been fostered by a decline of belief in private property and the competitive market; for without the diffused power and initiative associated with these institutions it is difficult to imagine a society in which freedom may be effectively preserved. ”iii – The founding statement of the Mont Pelerin Society 

The Mont Pelerin Society still exists to this day and was a group of intellectuals founded in 1947 identifying as classical liberals, fundamentally opposed to the state interventionism associated with Keynesianism and the centralised state planning that many socialists pursued. Harvey notes that Hayek, the lead figure, believed that “it would probably take at least a generation for that battle to be won, not only against Marxism but against socialism, state planning, and Keynesian interventionism.” iv This was to be the society’s motivating battle-principles in the decades that ensued but it was with the stagflation of the 1970s that their ideas entered the mainstream. During this period, think tanks associated with the Mont Pelerin Society took off with the Institute of Economic Affairs in Britain and the Heritage Foundation in the US. To take a concrete instance, the election of Margaret Thatcher – (who had previously met with Hayek) in 1979 “signalled a fierce determination to have done with the institutions and political ways of the social democratic state”. As Harvey deftly summarises, thus began a confrontation with trade unions, a welfare state retrenchment, privatisation, and the reduction of taxes. This was also earlier accompanied by Deng Xiaoping’s economic liberalisation of China and subsequently by Ronald Reagan’s election. 

Neoliberalism can perhaps best be understood as a political-economic arrangement committed to free markets, free global trade, private property, deregulation, and privatisation. The state’s intervention is primarily to create markets in areas such as healthcare, education, water, and more but is limited to not thereafter intervening in those subsequent markets. The state is also to structure “military, defence, police, and legal structures and functions required to secure private property rights and to guarantee…the proper functioning of markets.”  – to protect the arrangement. 

With the founding statement of the Mont Pelerin Society, we can demarcate the ways in which our neoliberal moment is ideologically founded on an understanding of classical liberalism. A concern for human dignity, liberty, freedom of expression, a critical attitude towards state authority and a belief in the competitive nature of markets to bring about well-being can all be found within the statement. These are of course also hallmarks of classical liberalism. A particular idea we also see here is that “the dispersion of power that results from a free-market economy based on private property protects the liberty of subjects against encroachments by the state”, such that the commitments to free markets and private property protects other values like free speech and freedom of thought. V  

While there is without a doubt a connection between liberalism and the dominant political imagination that we are occupying (that connection can be construed as liberalism the philosophy as morally justifying liberalism the reality and as providing an ideological tool) – I believe that liberalism needn’t be merely a political philosophy that upholds the status quo. The very same values of freedom, equality and anti-authoritarianism could equally be understood and used for socialist ends and have been done so.

### The Second Sense and Liberty

In turning away from the realm of the material and real and towards the ideal and abstract, one is always tempted to think that one has turned to simplicity, clarity, and consistency. If philosophy here is the ideal and abstract, then things are never quite that way. 

One common way of defining liberalism as a philosophy is by centring its dominant theme – liberty. Even following this thread will take us into tensions present within the liberal tradition as there are three principal understandings of Liberty: Negative, Positive and Republican. 

Negative liberty can be understood as freedom from interference. As Berlin says, “Political liberty in this sense is simply the area within which a man can act unobstructed by others. ”vi To be coerced under this understanding is for someone to intentionally interfere with me such that they stop me from doing something I would otherwise do.  
In contrast, positive liberty is the idea that freedom is principally a matter of determining oneself and how one lives. This has also been intertwined with ideas of achieving a higher self or bettering oneself. 

Now, if you’re not getting too sick of the academicy schmackademicy, here comes a third… 

Thirdly, republican liberty is freedom understood as freedom from arbitrary power. This might sound like negative liberty, but it’s distinguished in its focus on the “structural relationship that exists between persons or groups.” vii Thus, it focuses on the broader institutions or ideas that can lead one to be dominated by arbitrary power. It is also suggested that republican liberty focuses on the potential or capacity to be dominated, which is configured in its structural emphasis. 

There are competing claims as to which understanding of liberty one should favour. Berlin rejected positive liberty in favour of negative liberty, whereas the likes of Rousseau and Hegel favoured the former. Broadly speaking (so broad that it might theoretically get me killed by both philosophy and political science professors), we might also understand the distinction between classical liberalism and modern liberalism (which found its home in social democracies) as to an extent a division between abiding negative versus positive conceptions of liberty.

To not belabour the explanation anymore, the other central values of liberalism are the equality of human beings; anti-authoritarianism insofar as establishing moral, social and political settings without deference to divinity/tradition/hierarchy; the right to free expression and free thought (perhaps best defended by Mill’s argument that we need challenges to beliefs to understand why one should hold those beliefs); a tolerance of a plurality of beliefs; and a commitment to democratic political arrangements wherein a body of citizens voluntarily act to confer legitimacy on a sovereign. 

## Part 3 Honneth on Liberalism and Socialism 

Now to begin moving towards the crux of the argument, I turn to the work of a contemporary political philosopher who has attempted a reconciliation between liberalism and socialism. 

Axel Honneth outlines the possibility of understanding socialism as historically emerging from the French Revolution’s demands for freedom, equality, and fraternity. The early socialists (Owen, Saint-Simon, Fourier) understood themselves to be uneasy inheritors of these ideals. Socialism was an “immanent critique” of the capitalist order – an acceptance of the three ideals while arguing that they couldn’t cohere together as long as there was an individualistic understanding of liberty. Furthermore, these ideals remained abstract insofar as capitalism could not provide them to whole swathes of the population. Here, one means of understanding the relationship between socialism and liberalism emerges. Socialism as a movement for the democratisation of the social spheres of life and democratic control over the means of production accepts the core tenets of liberalism. However, it then begs the question as to whether those values can be meaningfully instated in the world under a system of private ownership, and what alternative economic arrangement is needed to realise those values. 

Honneth also argues for a second way of understanding the relationship between socialism and liberalism. He points out that socialism developed a notion of liberty as “social freedom” which was an advancement over the three conceptions of liberty previously presented. This philosophical achievement also meant that socialism could adopt the French Revolution’s ideals without them contradicting one another. An example of the clash is that, insofar as freedom is individualistic, there cannot be fraternity as self-interested economic freedom exercised in the market leads to competitive struggle. The point can be further generalised: under a system of private ownership of the economy which one might defend on the basis of negative liberty, workers must compete with each other to attain employment. The private ownership also engenders inequality in wealth and income concentration insofar as workers are exploited to ensure that wealth and the concentration of wealth in private hands is further exercised in politics – through party donations, media control, funding of think tanks and other means – to maintain inequality. 

In fact, Honneth presents a familiar figure – Marx (albeit the young version) – as being awakened to this tension. In a commentary on Mill, Marx points out that the capitalist market compels individuals to see each other as subjects interested in their own self-interest. This means that they cannot form the mutual sympathy required for fraternity. 

Social freedom is the freedom wherein “Individual subjects can only realize their…freedom as members of a free social community….in which the reciprocal fulfilment of generally shared intentions is without compulsion and thus takes place in…mutual sympathy.” viii The idea behind this is that freedom is something that is realised by a collective. For there to be freedom, there must be mutual sympathy – every individual in the collective must care for other individuals’ self-realisation. 

We can identify this socialist conception of freedom as being linked to the positive and republican iterations of liberty. The concern for individuals in the collective as realising themselves and satisfying their needs is similar to the notion of self-determination. Whereas republican liberty focuses on the coercive nature of arbitrary power, socialist freedom goes a step further insofar as it is not just power but intentions that can hinder freedom. If a person’s intentions are opposed by the intentions of another person, then there cannot be freedom. Social freedom depends on all members of society realising their intentions together – rather than hindering them.  

Humans cannot realise freedom by themselves but rather must do so with others, and the basis for this is in mutual sympathy. Presented with this new understanding of freedom, the original ideals of the French Revolution and of liberalism hold together with much less tension. Freedom requires people to join each other in their attempts at self-realisation, which in turn requires that they are in solidaristic relations with one another. The fact that freedom is collective and depends on mutual sympathy also seems to require and boost the notion of equal access to the material and social means necessary for a flourishing life. ix 

## Part 4 

Why do we need a political philosophy (liberalism) at all? 
So far, I’ve outlined two broad outlines based on Honneth such that liberalism and socialism can be taken as fruitfully compatible. The fruit that’s borne from this tree tastes like a real commitment to certain liberal values and is textured by its commitment to a new understanding of liberty that supplants previous ones. However, one may assent to the compatibility of the two ideas but still turn to a more general question: why do socialists need a political philosophy at all? 

Firstly, a word on political philosophy. I believe that for our purposes, the best way of understanding the role of political philosophy is under Charles Mills’ concept of “ideal theory”. Wherein such a political philosophy is an idealised model for how to organise our political, economic, and social structures. Stahl usefully expands on certain features of such an ideal theory: 

It identifies an idea of a standard. This correct idea of the standard is necessary to know whether the political order is acceptable. 
The ideal theory considers what principles of this standard are required for a given society to meet the standard while still being possible. These are the principles that would realise the standard. 

So, the first clear reason why socialists should be interested in political philosophy is that it seems necessary to have a philosophy to provide us with certain principles outlining what a just or acceptable society would abide by. I believe that this is something already implicit in the ethical appeals and discussions that take part in civil society every day in the seminar room, the pub, the football pitch, and the kitchen. In our whirls of phrases and utterances about the wrongness or rightness of certain policies, practices, and institutions, we seem to also either be basing our opinions on more general principles or suggesting them. It needn’t be that people are self-consciously aware of these principles — the point is that they’re implicit.

The second reason is that the standard identified by a political philosophy is needed as a benchmark against which we can measure our potential progress or deviation from the standard. For example, if one of the principles of the standard is “equal access to means necessary for a flourishing life”, then we have a clear principle against which to measure something like the proposal for universal basic income or welfare cuts. Perhaps UBI would be a step in the right direction to realising this principle and the cuts to welfare would be a regressive direction taking us away from it. Being conscious of what principles one abides by is significant in co-developing the ideas and political projects for the socialist movement. While the UBI-welfare example is trivial in the sense of many socialists being sympathetic to something like UBI (under the condition that the welfare state is not rolled back) and against welfare cuts; there can arise disagreements which are obfuscated by discussants being unsure of their principles. An example of this may be the current “free speech” debate. Wherein we have those defending offensive speech in the public sphere and those against such speech in sympathy with the people who are harmed by such speech. Yet it may be fruitful if both sides (or mainly the latter) see themselves as abiding by certain principles of freedom of expression and equality. For example, the person who criticises such speech can make the point that unrestrained freedom of expression will materially create a climate that inhibits the self-determining power of marginalised groups to express themselves. Thus, adherence to free expression actually requires there to be some restraint such that the right to free expression is available to all – not just some. 

The third reason why socialists should care about political philosophy is that any political movement must also have moral motivations to sustain that movement. Firstly, Wright makes the point that in an era when there are no longer absolute proletariat vs bourgeois class divisions solely motivated by material interests, Socialism requires there to be a moral sense of what a just political arrangement is. The project of building coalitions between the working-class, ethnic, and religious groups, people of different genders and sexualities, people working in different sectors, and more is not purely sustained by material interests. Such moral motivations to be sure might well be more akin to less abstract (but nonetheless admirable) notions like “treat people the way you want to be treated” or “think about what it’s like to be in their shoes” than Rawls’ principles of justice. However, there may well be something to be gained if these members understand themselves and each other as part of a broader explicitly moral-political project – as understanding oneself as championing the ideal of equality, being an underlabourer for freedom, or being a singer for democracy. Such a hypothetical community is surely not the one that one finds themselves in within the buzzing of everyday life, but that abstraction is also the very virtue of the idea. I may not know anyone in my immediate community who is gay or disabled or a prisoner; however, my dedication to certain moral-political ideals means that I must also be committed to the dignity and freedom of communities I am yet to come across. 

Secondly, we must acknowledge the fragility of “generation left’s” belief in socialism. Meadway excellently points out that there has been a decline in the institutions that support the socialist movement. xi An instance of this is that there’s been a decline in union density from around 50% in 1979 to 24% in 2020. Furthermore, only around 4% of those younger than 24 are union members. xiiWe can also look at another country saddled with low pay and insecurity, France, as a word of warning. In the 2022 Second Round Presidential Election, 39% of 18-24-year-olds and 49% of 25-34-year-olds voted for Le Pen. xiii Meadway also goes on to highlight that the anticapitalism of generation left is quite ambivalent. For example, 65% agree that capitalism can help deal with climate change and 60% of 16-24-year-olds were in favour of spending cuts as a way for the government to balance the budget. xiv Of course, there is also evidence for support for socialism; 67% of those aged 16-24 want to live under socialism, and there is strong agreement that climate change and the housing crisis are capitalist problems. xv Nonetheless, support is still ambivalent, if not contradictory. An obvious, and correct, conclusion to draw is that for Labour and the socialist movement to maintain their youthful support they must present economic policies that respond to the needs of the young. Another conclusion is that we must also begin to present a broader moral vision (a political philosophy) to sustain this fragile support. 

## Part 5 

To begin to draw things to a close, parts 2, 3 and 4 of this essay are to be understood as conjoining to form an argument for 1) the need for political philosophy on the left and 2) a brief sketch of what makes liberalism an appealing tradition to fulfil that need. I’m under no illusion that there are many objections throughout the course of this essay that have not been convincingly outlined. One may criticise ideal theory as necessarily reproducing the unjust ideology of the present via its abstracting methods, one may well doubt the strategy of reclaiming a political philosophy that now is a signifier for the political order we oppose, one may be critical of the emphasis on freedom given in this essay and perhaps most of all, one may merely point to all the exclusions and injustices that liberalism (as both political order and philosophy) has subjected women, the colonised, the working-class, ethnic minorities and gays, lesbians and the trans community to. The fact that I’ve not defended against all these possible criticisms is principally my fault, dear reader. Nonetheless, I believe that there are convincing replies to such criticisms and I myself am still studying and learning (aren’t we all?) with the hopes of one day being able to fully reconcile socialism and liberalism. But a first attempt has been made. It may not be the catalyst of conversion, but I hope it sparks consideration on your part. 

If there is one fuzzy, undetailed line of thought that I still (maybe stubbornly) see as a reason to commit to liberalism it is this: as far as philosophical traditions go, liberalism is getting long in the tooth (and is perhaps also in a moment of decay). It is, as aforementioned, a political order and at times a philosophy that’s engendered many regretful things. Even with these concessions however, I return to the opening quote of Chomsky in the essay – the spirit of liberalism was one of anti-authoritarianism against deference towards traditional forms of power, a recognition of the dignity and equality of human beings, a defence of free thinking and free expression, and an embrace of democracy and perhaps most of all – freedom. I cannot so far discern a rival philosophical tradition of political theory that would be a better companion or that does as much justice to the values that we socialists hold dear. As much as I sympathise with criticisms of liberalism, I believe that the way to respond is not to reject liberal values but to ensure that they truly apply universally for the betterment of humanity. To fulfil the promises and spirit of liberalism requires nothing less than a turn to socialism. 
 
## References

Considering this is before the “Neoliberal” period proper, Chomsky here is referring to the appropriation of Liberalism by moderate Social Liberals and Conservatives. See Chomsky, N (1978) “The Ideas of Chomsky, Men of Ideas”. Interviewed by Bryan Magee, BBC. See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxvSQnmcYLo 
Adorno, T 2020, Minima Moralia: Reflections from Damaged Life, Verso, London iii See <https://www.montpelerin.org/event/429dba23-fc64-4838-aea3b847011022a4/websitePage:6950c74b-5d9b-41cc-8da1-3e1991c14ac5> 
iv Harvey, D 2005, A Brief History of Neoliberalism, Oxford University Press, Oxford, p21 v Courtland, Shane, D, Gaus, G, Schmidtz, D, 2022, Liberalism, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2022/entries/liberalism/> vi Berlin, I 1969, Four Essays on Liberty, Oxford University Press, Oxford, p122 vii Lovett, F 2022, Republicanism, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2022/entries/republicanism/>. 
viii Honneth A 2016, The Idea of Socialism: Towards a Renewal, Polity, p45-46 
 ix For an explanation of such principles, See Wright, E.O. 2019, How to Be an Anti-Capitalist in the Twenty-First Century, Verso 
Stahl, T 2022, What (if anything) is ideological about ideal theory?, European Journal of Political Theory, p1-
24 
See the thought-provoking article < https://novaramedia.com/2021/07/22/generation-left-might-not-bethat-left-after-all/> 
See <https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/trade-union-statistics-2020> xiii See <https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/ct/news/documents/2022-
04/Ipsos%20Sopra%20Steria_Sociologie%20des%20e%CC%81lectorats%20et%20profil%20des%20abstentionn istes_24%20Avril%2020h.pdf> 
See <https://twitter.com/RedfieldWilton/status/1411341470196547586?s=20> 
See <https://iea.org.uk/media/67-per-cent-of-young-brits-want-a-socialist-economic-system-finds-newpoll/> 
