# Cost of Living Crisis

It feels almost trite to say that the 2008 financial crisis irrevocably changed the landscape of the country. Of course, everyone’s lives were drastically impacted by the bubble created in the housing market by banks in order to line their pockets with more unnecessary wealth. Of course, none of them were punished. Following the crash, the New Labour government was blamed and still is for allowing this process to happen, and the country was put under the supposedly strong oversight of a Conservative and Liberal Democrat coalition held together by austerity policy and David Cameron’s artificial smile. Stating this feels like reductive, well-trodden territory but it’s also necessary because to actively discuss what caused the financial crisis is to see the domino effect that led to the current cost of living crisis.

In the aftermath of the ascension to power of the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition, the policies of austerity were imposed as a supposed necessity. All areas of society, according to the government at the time at least, needed to endure temporary cuts to funding and a shrink in their budgets to help raise the country out of the hardships it had plummeted into as a result of the financial crash. There was apparently no other option. It didn’t matter that the number of people in poverty rose, or that an additional 335,000 deaths between 2012 and 2019 were attributable to austerity. These forms of suffering were portrayed as inevitable – if the government was to take a utilitarian approach, then some people would bear the brunt of these policies.  Of course, not everyone has suffered; the top fifth of earners continued to hold onto half of the country’s wealth, as they had before the crisis. If you regularly interact with any of these people, many of whom hold sway within society, you would be forgiven for thinking that there was no austerity and no financial crisis. However, they would never be portrayed as wrong for behaving in this way; they had simply gamed the system. These were simply the people who managed to let all the travesty pass them by without having to bear any of the consequences, whilst more people had to claim benefits or rely on food banks.

It is in this light that the current cost of living crisis or the ongoing waves of strikes being organised by various sectors from nurses to teachers can be fully understood for what they are. Under the guise of supposed solidarity, people were told that they would endure a slight period of hardship but as we all did that one day, in the near future it would end, and we would all look back on this as a bad memory. That didn’t happen. The supposed collective hardship people would be facing soon got washed away by the clear wealth that was being flaunted by the wealthy, who spent time in luxury hotels, avoiding taxes and wearing expensive clothes for no reason whilst nurses used food banks and people had to choose between heating their homes or feeding their family. When people have seen – time and again – the hollow materialism of the wealth paraded around whilst they cannot afford basic necessities, they inevitably turn to disruption. The current government didn’t have “fairness at the heart” (in the words of Rishi Sunak when he was discussing his economic policy whilst campaigning to be Prime Minister) when they failed to impose enough legislation to prevent the cost of petrol, food, clothes, houses, cleaning products and any other essentials from spiralling. They didn’t have “fairness at the heart” when they crashed the economy only to bail themselves out and then complain that nurses want a 19% pay rise.

Whatever is said, the only reason we are in this cost of living crisis is the government’s self-interest. They have imposed these corrupt systems that have devastated the country and left it in a collapsed state and, instead of taking responsibility for it, turned to blame everyone else. Whilst the COVID-19 pandemic did have an impact on the number of people on waiting lists those numbers were already at four million in 2019. The war in Ukraine and the subsequent sanctions on Russia did impact the cost of oil around the world but the EU have imposed a price cap on crude oil to prevent spiralling costs. These are not the true causes of the current crisis we are in. In actuality, it is a government that failed to learn the correct lessons from the financial crisis and instead opted to punish the majority by imposing rigid policies of austerity that have no real end in sight whilst imposing tax cuts that only benefit the top sections of society. The cost of living crisis was never something caused by short-term events – it was simply the end result of years of austerity damaging the country beyond all belief. When people protest the cost of living crisis and how it has impacted them, they aren’t complaining about short-term cuts and losses but rather a systemic squashing of their basic ways of living by a government that claims to care about them but is in actuality only focused on serving its own interests and lining its own pockets. 
